{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Usability Design Process\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Often good to have a mix of approaches and know which to use best for different circumstances\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 What Is the Area of Expertise?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab pen-and-paper walkthrough is without a computer in sight\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab they have to think about it as they do it, so it becomes a very honest representation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab you can find which steps are easily forgotten\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Who Are the Users?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab what are they good at?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab attitude = motivation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. fun?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab generally better to design for small, tightly-defined groups\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Segmentation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Place people along axes for each criterion\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Personas\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Makes it easier for the designer to think about the groups \u8211-\u160?e.g. "how would 'George' find this?"\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab better than e.g. a really large requirements document\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Personas\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It has been found that a product developed to meet the specific needs of a particular group often meets the needs of a much wider group.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Rolling luggage was originally designed for airline pilots and air crew\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ballpoint pens were originally designed for people who didn't have the hand-eye co-ordination to use fountain pens\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cassette tapes were originally designed for blind people (who couldn't thread reel-to-reel tape)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Primary Users and Secondary Users\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This is less common nowadays\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Example: a ticket-booking system\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab primary users are sales assistants\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab secondary users are customers\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Needs of the two groups may be different. Both sets of needs should be identified and catered for.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 What Do the Users Want to Do?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Need to distinguish between:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab normative needs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab needs identified by professional designers/developers\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab user needs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab expressed needs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab what end-users say they want\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab felt needs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab what end-users actually want from the system\sa180\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Users may lack the technical vocabulary or understanding to express felt needs. Unmet felt needs are often expressed as a general dissatisfaction with a system. Users will often not use the system in this case.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is a huge problem which has never been fully solved (e.g. the NHS computerised database system).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sometimes end-user needs may be excessive and impractical, but this does not mean they can be ignored. You should explain why you've designed it in a different way from that.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Determining User Needs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The traditional methods are:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab direct observation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab though people may behave different when observed\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab questionnaires\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab interviews\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Direct Observation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You can study existing users of similar systems.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Ideally you should observe people who are using the system for their own ends, unprompted by you.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 For example, if the task is to develop a better ATM interface, you could use video to monitor people using existing ATMs and note any problems they encounter.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is rarely possible, due to:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ethics/confidentiality issues\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab work is distributed over different places\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab work is done co-operatively\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 An alternative is to ask a group of people to carry out certain relevant operations in the laboratory, and then observe them.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This gives no guarantee that they are carrying out the same operations in the same way as they would if unprompted.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Might be worth using both techniques in parallel though.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs24 Artefacts\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Where an application is based on existing systems, it may be possible to use an artefact (an object or aid used in the performance of a task) to identify non-normative needs.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This can tell you which parts of the process are difficult, or provide clues as to how users work with a system and what problems they encounter. Examples:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab notes stuck to the computer detailing keyboard shortcuts\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab reference manuals kept close at hand (perhaps with some pages well-thumbed), or photocopied sheets from reference manuals pinned in a prominent position\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab shows which things people find difficult to remember\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab manuals created by the users themselves\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab computer keys tippexed and drawn over with reminders of shortcuts, etc.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Questionnaires\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Questions might cover:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab how much experience they have with relevant systems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab did they encounter particular problems?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if they have tried competing systems, did they find one easier to use than another, and if so then in what way?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Questioning can be carried out through questionnaires or interviews.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Good questionnaire has 10-15 questions and no more \u8211- if you can't find it out with that many questions, you need to use another method.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Closed questions are ones where the user is choosing preset answers, open questions allow the user to put in their own answers.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab designer/developer inevitably starts from their own perspective, and is most like\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab there are ways for checking a questionnaire for normative bias, but this won't identify topics excluded altogether by bias\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab important to get the questionnaire reviewed by others\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab can be good to get a test run\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ask something like "did this questionnaire seem to be in favour of software A or software B?"\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Interviews\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Can use walkthroughs where direct observation and questionnaires won't work.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 These are conducted during face-to-face interviews, with pen and paper only.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This allows the subject to describe the process as they see it rather than as it is usually carried out.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Tells you which steps in a process are important to the user. Missing steps suggest that they are easily forgotten \u8211-\u160?may have to remind users.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Walkthroughs can be conducted at any stage of the design process.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Can also be a good sign of what to put in a questionnaire.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs24 Compared to Questionnaires\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab interviews are usually less structured\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this can be overcome to some extent by having the interviewer use a fixed list of questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this removes the main advantage of an interview \u8211- the opportunity to ask questions spontaneously as they arise\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab questionnaires provide a more formal structure setting than interviews, ensuring consistency between respondents\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab removes the risk of bias from an interviewer, ensuring respondents are free to provide their own perspective\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Often good to use both.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 How Will the Application Be Used?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Consider an ATM:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab it will be used outside, so it must be usable in all weathers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab screen must be viewable under all lighting conditions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab and you may want a simple screen layout\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab users might be wearing heavy clothing that impedes movement and makes them clumsier\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab might not want complicated interaction techniques\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In general, users may only be able to devote part of their attention to the task because:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab they are surrounded by other people and feel pressured or concerned about their privacy\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab they are simultaneously trying to control small children\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab they may be driving\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Applications on PCs and mobile devices generally pose fewer problems since the user has more control over where and how. There may still be issues with distraction, privacy, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Issues to be considered include:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab physical aspects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab lighting, noise levels, space/layout\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab safety aspects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab distractions (for safety-critical systems)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab social aspects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab individual or group working, task-sharing or dependency, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab which data is shared between people in a group, how much\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab role of each person in the group, etc.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab organisational aspects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab IT policy, user support, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e.g. permissions to access documents\sa180\sa180\sa180\par}
}
