{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Design of a User Study\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab have a prediction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab choose subjects\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Quality of Data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When designing a test or questionnaire, careful thought should be given to the kind of data it will generate.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If our aim (for example) is to gather ideas on how to improve a system, then a qualitative questionnaire will be suitable.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, if we hope to demonstrate that our system is better than existing systems in some way, we may want to use a statistical test to prove this.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In the latter case we will need to design our test or questionnaire carefully to ensure it yields testable data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Statisticians classify data under the following headings:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab nominal-scaled data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab lowest quality (very noisy)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab there is no numerical relationship between scores\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. a score of 2 is not necessarily higher than a score of 1\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab possibly useful for checking if a certain error (represented by a certain score) has happened a lot\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ordinal-scaled data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab a score of 2 is higher than a score of 1, but not necessarily twice as high\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab data obtained from questionnaires is usually ordinal-scaled\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab better quality\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab interval-scaled data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab a score of 2 is exactly twice as high as a score of 1\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab timing data is usually interval-scaled\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab better quality (less noisy \u8211- can see trends with fewer subjects)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab parametric data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab data must be interval scaled\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab The scores must be drawn from a population that has:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a normal distribution\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1440 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab if subjects measured on factors relevant to the study, result would follow a normal distribution\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a normal variance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1440 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab the spread of scores must be the same as that found in the general population\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab best quality (least noisy)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Most test in usability engineering use ordinal-scaled data or interval-scaled data. Parametric data is usually too expensive / too much effort for the benefit it gives.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Rather than counting errors, can count time lost due to errors, giving interval-scaled data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The higher the quality of the data we gather, the fewer samples we will need to draw valid conclusions.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In some cases, it's not possible to design a test that yields parametric or interval-scaled data. In such cases there is no option but to gather nominal or ordinal-scaled data and take a large number of samples.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Data Analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Say we have conducted a study to evaluate an interactive training system.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The design is as follows:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab 2 groups of 20 subjects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab randomly assign the subjects to groups\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab one group performs a set task using our system (experimental condition), the other group [\u8230?]\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Frequency Distribution\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab presents the data without loss\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab presents it in a form that allows the characteristics of the data to be understood more easily than is possible using just the raw data\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Average\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab especially for small groups, one outlier can significantly affect the average\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 \u160?Standard Deviation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab measure of dispersion in the scores\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab adds info over just presenting the average\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Normal Distribution\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab research has shown that many [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab because it's symmetrical, mean, mode, and median all have the same value\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab can be defined using only the mean and the standard deviation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab the percentage of scores falling above or below a given value of standard deviation is fixed.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Statistical Inference\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 All the techniques described so far are intended to describe or summarise data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sometimes we need to go further and attempt to prove that:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab there is a significant difference between two sets of experimental data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab there is a significant difference in a particular direction, e.g. that data-set a is better in some way than data-set b\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is known as drawing statistical inference.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Significance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When designing experiments, we try to keep all possible factors stable with the exception of one, the independent variable, which we deliberately manipulate in some way.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We then measure another variable, the dependent variable, to see how the change in the independent variable has affected it.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, we can't assume that all changes in the dependent variable are due to our manipulation of the independent variable.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Some changes will almost certainly occur by chance.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The purpose of statistical testing is to determine the likelihood that the results occurred by chance.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We can never prove beyond doubt that any differences observed are the result of changes in the independent variable rather than mere chance occurrences.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, we can determine just how likely is it that a given result [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Before testing, we formulate two hypotheses:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab any difference arise purely as a result of chance variations (the null hypothesis).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab any differences arise \u8211- at least in part - as a result of the change in the independent variable\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab the alternate or experimental hypothesis\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Statistical tests allow us to determine the likelihood of our results having occurred purely by chance. They allow us to decide whether we should accept the null hypothesis or the alternate hypothesis.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We usually express probability on a scale from 0 to 1. We can't prove anything for certain, but we can express our result to a level of probability.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The significance level (e.g. p <= 0.05) indicates that the likelihood of the observed difference having occurred as a result of chance factors is less than some amount (e.g. one in 20).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We choose a level of significance in advance, then test for it:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if the outcome is greater than our chosen significance level, we accept the null hypothesis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if the outcome is equal to or less than our chosen significance level we accept the alternate hypothesis\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Level of Significance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 What's an appropriate level to test for?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if we choose a relatively high value of significance (e.g. 1 in 10), we are more likely to obtain results, but the results will be wrong more often\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this is known as a type 1 error\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if we choose a very low value, we can place more confidence, but we may fail to find a correlation when it does in fact exist\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this is known as a type 2 error\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There is no correct value for significance, but the value p <= 0.05 is commonly used and is regarded as a good compromise.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When a more stringent test is required (e.g. because the result is controversial or the findings may be used in a critical application), a value of p <= 0.01 is sometimes used.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In industry, a study is usually only done once, but in research, studies are replicated and repeated.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Choice of Test\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When choosing a test, the following factors should be taken into account:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab two-sample or k-sample (more than two)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab most tests compare two groups of samples, e.g. the results obtained from comparative tests on two different systems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab wherever possible design for a two-sample test\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab some tests can be used to compare more than two groups of samples, e.g. the results obtained from comparative tests on three or four different systems\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab related measures or independent measures\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab different tests are used depending upon whether the two (or more) groups from which the data is drawn are related or not\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab repeated measures is best, because if you've just matched your subjects, you may not match them on all relevant criteria\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab nominal, ordinal, interval, or parametric data\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 These three factors are the principal factors to be taken into account when designing a study and choosing a statistical test.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are tests available to suit every combination of those factors. Various software packages are available to carry out these and similar tests.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The main task facing [\u8230?].\par}
}
