{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Brief History\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Early Computers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The earliest computers were experimental, and were programmed and operated by the people who designed and built them. It was impossible to use them without knowing a lot about their internal structure.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Binary code was used for input and for output (bright light is a 1, dull light is a 0).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There was very little distinction between operation and programming \u8211- no long-term storage of programs.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Mainframes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Large mainframes were the next generation \u8211- they were programmed and operated by highly trained staff. No-one except them had access to the computer.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A command language was used for control, and printed output could be formatted as required.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Computers were expensive and relatively rare, so it was important to use them at maximum potential. You couldn't afford to let them be idle.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Entering code online would be too slow, so they were batch-programmed.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Tasks were prepared offline\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Batches loaded and run in sequence\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Operator intervention was just running batches and getting things back working.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab No interaction while a batch was running\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Terminal-and-Server or Desktop Systems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 These were programmed and operated by trained staff.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A command language used for control\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Printed output could be formatted as required, and the screen display could be formatted to some extent.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Lots of training was involved for office workers to use them.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In order to use a command language effectively, the operator must know a large number of commands and the correct syntax for use with each of them. Psychologists were employed to help create command-sets that were easy to remember. They developed the first guidelines for user-interface design:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Use memorable command names\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Keep command names short\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Use consistent syntax where possible\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 While command languages within a company were pretty consistent, UNIX at the time was very inconsistent, because the whole idea was that different organisations could contribute commands.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Difficulty\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Still, even well-designed command-languages are difficult to learn. In the 1960s, a number of researchers set out to improve this.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A key problem with command languages is that they rely heavily on recall. Psychological research suggests that humans are better at recognition than recall.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Recognition requires less mental effort than recall, and is about twice as fast and three times as accurate (Nobel, 2001). This has been well-known since about the 1930s.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We can see this in facial recognition, or recognition of things in photos.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Short-Term Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Human short-term memory is also quite limited. We can only hold a few items in memory at any one time. This makes it difficult to perform mental operations that involve more than a few pieces of data. Think of comparing different computers with all their info and prices.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, such tasks become much easier if we write the data down or display it on a screen.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Spatial Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Human beings have excellent spatial memory. It's hard to define, but for example if we're distracted from reading something, when we come back we can easily remember which part of the page we were on. This is tied into pattern recognition (a mix of upper and lowercase letters makes this easier).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Recalling where an item is displayed typically requires less memory than recalling what information it contains.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 So the challenge facing researchers was to:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Reduce reliance on recall\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Support recognition wherever possible\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. by using the screen as a form of external memory\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GUI Developments\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 SketchPad was developed in 1963. It was an innovative graphics programme that introduced new interaction methods:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Data was represented by visible objects which could be manipulated using a light-pen.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Objects could be moved and re-sized.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab New instances of objects could be created, inheriting features from the parent.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This was developed by Douglas Engelbart in 1968, which used a mouse as a cheaper alternative to the light-pen. He also introduced new ideas:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Tiled windows\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Hypertext links\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Cross-document editing\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Alan Kay proposed the use of overlapping windows in his 1969 PhD thesis, and the idea of a portable computer.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He also implemented these ideas later in Smalltalk (the first purely object-oriented language) and InterLisp (1974).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 David Canfield Smith developed the concept of icons for his 1975 PhD thesis.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He further developed his ideas while working at Xerox where he was one of the chief designers of the Star 8010 Information System, the first commercial system which used a GUI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Direct Manipulation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Ben Shneiderman (1982) analysed a number of graphical interfaces and concluded that the features that made them successful were:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Visibility of objects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Replacement of complex command-languages with actions to manipulate visible objects directly\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Incremental action at the interface with rapid feedback\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab E.g. something moving as you drag it\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Reversibility of actions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We expect an "undo" for everything, but it wasn't common in the past\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Follows from incremental action with rapid feedback\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Once you know there's no danger and you can undo everything, you're encouraged to explore, and learn by playing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Syntactic correctness of actions (every action is legal)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Illegal actions were made difficult to do, and things were greyed out to show that they weren't desirable actions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Few/no changes of mode\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab E.g. different modes in a text editor\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab When modes existed, they should be visually signalled (e.g. with a different cursor)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He coined the term Direct Manipulation to describe the style of interaction supported by such interfaces.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Modern\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 GUIs supporting Direct Manipulation are still the basis of most contemporary computing.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Direct Manipulation has also been extended to accommodate new interaction technologies such as touch-screens and 3D navigation and display.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, we're moving into new eras \u8211- speech, auditory, and gestural interaction don't suit the concept of Direct Manipulation as well.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Efforts to use such technologies effectively are driving the development of new interaction styles.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Summary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Early Computers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Minimal interaction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Little distinction between operation and programming\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Lots of expertise required for all use\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab All interaction based on computer's requirements\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. binary output\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Modern Computers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Extensive interaction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Control, authoring, scripting, programming, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Many different levels of expertise supported\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interaction increasingly based on user's requirements\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Evolution of Interaction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Driving Factors:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Reductions in cost and size\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Need to support a wide range of users\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Application to a wider range of tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Development of new interaction techniques\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Reductions in Cost and Size\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early computers were expensive, and so had to be used to full potential. There was little need or opportunity for interaction.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Modern computers are small and cheap, which allows each user to have many computers. Computers are mostly idle.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Need to support a wide range of users\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early computers could only be operated by highly-trained staff.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Modern computers are used by a wide range of people with varying needs:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab novices and experts\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab frequent and occasional users\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab users with special needs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Improvements in accessibility are increasingly being driven by legal requirements, e.g. the Americans with Disabilities Act, the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Application to a wider range of tasks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early computers were used for a limited range of tasks.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Modern computers used for a wider range of tasks:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Casual/occasional tasks for which training is not feasible\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab It's not reasonable to expect people to become expert at using every application they encounter, particularly applications they use infrequently.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It is easy enough to support occasional/non-expert users in simple tasks.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It is more difficult to support occasional/non-expert users in complex tasks.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Web applications and smartphone apps are becoming as sophisticated as stand-alone applications.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab However, users have little commitment to individual applications.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab They are unlikely to read complex instructional material, and if they find a site complex or difficult they'll go elsewhere\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We're increasingly using software in place of people.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Safety-critical control applications\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Computers are widely used in military/aircraft systems, medical systems, plant control (nuclear/chemical/etc.)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Even highly trained staff make mistakes, so software has to be designed to prevent mistakes wherever possible.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Games and other entertainment applications\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Hands-free applications\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Development of new interaction techniques\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab touch screens (including multi-touch screens), 3D displays\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab joysticks, 3D mice, and other input devices\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab speech synthesis and recognition\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab tactile feedback devices\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab spatial and other auditory displays\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab image recognition, eye-tracking, movement tracking, etc.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 The Future\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In the future, it is likely that human-computer interaction will become more like human-human interaction:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab proactive rather than reactive\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e.g. if you're speaking to someone, they're usually anticipating your needs at that moment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab we don't tell people things we think they already know\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in speech, both sides are equal participants\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab context-aware\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if you make the same mistake several times with a computer you get the same message\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab with a person, they'll realise they're not getting through to you and will change what they're saying\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab adaptive\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab rather than work the same way for everyone, software changes to deal with different people\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e.g. e-learning \u8211- does this learner work better with pictures or text?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Reactive vs. Proactive Systems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Proactive\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab systems or user can initiate actions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab user attention is elsewhere (hands-free, eyes-free)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab context-aware\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab adaptivity essential for effective operation\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Reactive\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab user always initiates actions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab computer is focus of user attention\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab context-free\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab little need for adaptability\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Usability Engineering\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Accessibility\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Some users may have special needs. Software should be designed so that users with special needs can use it as easily as other users can, but this is difficult to achieve.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 For example, people who are blind/visually-impaired can operate GUIs with the help of a screen reader. However, screen-reader users tend to:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab work more slowly\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab make more errors\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab report higher levels of fatigue\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Giving users with special needs the same level of access as other users is a major challenge.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Wherever possible, users should be able to enter data and receive feedback in a form that is natural and appropriate to the task at hand.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Summary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A good interface should:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab be as easy to learn and remember as possible\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab but sometimes learning new skills is unavoidable or desirable\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab contain functions that are genuinely useful\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab exclude functions that increase complexity without improving utility\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab offer sufficient flexibility to cope with changing work-patterns\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab enable users to work efficiently\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab it should be possible to achieve goals quickly and with few errors\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab may want low throughput but low number of errors made\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab be easy and pleasant to use\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab not place a high cognitive load on the user\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab allow the user to feel in control\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Users:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may have a very different view of that task/application domain from our own\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may differ considerably - we may have to design with several distinct groups of users in mind\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may change in their abilities/requirements while using the software\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may give all of only part of their attention to a task\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may vary in their motivation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab may be using a system for themselves of on behalf of somebody else\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab will find the system more efficient and pleasant to use if we minimise the amount of translation required at the interface\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Key Skills/Knowledge in HCI\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interaction styles\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. direct manipulation\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interaction technology\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. a mouse is the best compromise\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Human psychology/perception/etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab perception of colours\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Design/Evaluation techniques\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab guidelines\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Some people think guidelines are useful, some think they're unhelpful\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab metrics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab used as soon as possible in the creation of something\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab modelling\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab can be done before investing time and effort into something\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab iterative design and evaluation\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction Styles\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Command language\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Form filling\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Menu selection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Function keys\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Question and answer\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Direct manipulation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Anthropomorphic / natural language\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Interaction Technologies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Input\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab pointing/selection (mouse, joystick, touchscreen, eye-gaze)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab text entry (keyboard, keypad, speech)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Output\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Visual\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Audio\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Tactile\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Human Psychology and Perception\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Visual Perception\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Auditory perception\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Tactile\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab will start with this\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Guidelines\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Web content accessibility guidelines\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab eight golden rules (Shneiderman)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Smith & Mosier Guidelines for UI software\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab OSF Style Guide\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Johnson's GUI Bloopers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Human interface guidelines (Apple)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Speech interface guidelines (Larson)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Metrics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 These are used once you have a system, to measure it \u8211- kind of a counterpart to guidelines\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SUMI, WAMMI\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Accessibility validators\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Modelling Techniques\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Won't go into these in any detail, just a flavour of them\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Task Analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab hierarchical task analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab knowledge-based analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab entity-relationship techniques\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Cognitive Modelling\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab task-goal hierarchies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab linguistic/grammatical models\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab device-level models\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Design & Evaluation Techniques\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Questionnaire design\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Experimental design\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Statistical analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Was the difference relevant?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Iterative design and evaluation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Part of a design cycle\sa180\sa180\par}
}
