Lecturer: Kieran Herley, k.herley@cs.ucc.ie

Labs will start soon (in a week or two):

> Thurs 9—11 WGB.G20
>
> Thurs 4—6 WGB.G20

More info on those later.

There is a webpage:

> www.cs.ucc.ie/\~kieran/cs1106

This will have lecture slides (pdf format, extra printer-friendly
copies), lab sheets, handouts, examples.

Good to take notes ourselves in addition to his notes.

There is no assigned text, but a useful reference is:

> *Learning SQL (2nd edition)* by Alan Beaulieu
>
> O'Reilly (2009)

Final exam: 70%

Continuous Assessment: 30%

CA: 2 in-class tests (15% each):

1.  Friday 9th October

2.  Friday 13th November

> (provisional dates)

End of year exam will be a 90-minute exam, more details will be provided
later.

*\
*

Overview:
=========

A database is an IT tool used for maintaining and interacting with
records.

> Def: A shared, structured collection of logically related data
> designed to meet the information needs of an organisation.

A typical example would be a set of university academic records.

A database system deals with different databases that contain different
information.

Database System = Database(s) + Database Software

Database software:

-   Database Management System (DBMS) provides software infrastructure
    to manage multiple databases with differing structures, diverse
    content, etc.

-   Provides tools to allow data to be *manipulated* and *queried*

    -   **Manipulation:** add/delete/update data

    -   **Query:** "interrogate" data to obtain information of interest

Database(s)

-   Organisation may need multiple databases

-   University: academic records, payroll, library catalogue, accounts…

Databases form the foundation of most IT systems.

> Traditional examples:

-   public administration (e.g. CAO)

-   payroll

-   banking (account info)

-   retail (inventory)

> More novel examples:

-   facebook

-   ebay

-   amazon

-   flickr

-   tripadvisor

-   youtube

    -   you wouldn't think of videos normally as database info, but
        actually there is a DBMS there to keep track of info

Most e-commerce sites (like airling reservation systems) are built
around database "back-ends".

The database holds the data (flight schedules, prices, availability).

Web-server holds programs to await and respond to customer enquiries.

Even though it may not be obvious, all e-commerce requires databases.

Database work makes up a good chunk of all IT work, much more so than
its public profile/visibility would suggest.

The idea of a database and a database management system is pretty
important and ubiquitous.

*What will be studied:*

-   Structure and organisation of relational DBs

-   Specifying and manipulating DBs (tools for setting up, manipulating)

-   Using

    -   SQL – notation expressing DB queries

    -   MySQL – standard database software

-   Applying DB concepts to sample IT problems

-   Designing simple DBs


