No lecture on Friday.

Our Running Example
===================

This is a deliberately simple database for an example (single-table,
only 6 students, not too many columns).

Note it's more convenient to split names into first\_name and last\_name
fields, because then you can choose all the people of a certain first
name, for example.

Dates are expressed YYYY-MM-DD in SQL, which is more convenient and for
the moment we have to just take it for granted.

ID numbers are stored as strings rather than numbers because we never
need to treat them as numbers and it's more convenient to treat them as
strings.

Naming Conventions
------------------

SQL Rules:

-   start with a letter

-   composed of letters, digits, and underscores

-   NB: no internal spaces etc. (e.g. first\_name not first name)

Conventions:

-   use lower-case letters for names

-   use upper-case for keywords (e.g. SELECT)

-   names should be concise but *meaningful* (e.g. id\_number not y16id
    or id\_of\_student\_in\_question)

SQL Queries
-----------

An SQL query specifies what info we require from the database table(s).

The result returned will be an unnamed table.

We will look at SELECT queries first. These leave databases unchanged,
even if screwed up.

SELECT-FROM Queries
-------------------

Template:

> SELECT list\_of\_attributes
>
> FROM table-name;

*list\_of\_attributes* — list of columns of interest, comma- separated

*table-name* — specifies table

Each query is terminated with a semicolon.

Examples:

> SELECT id\_number
>
> FROM students;
>
> SELECT first\_name, last\_name
>
> FROM students;
>
> SELECT \*
>
> FROM students;

\* specifies all columns.

Distinctness
------------

Tuples in relations should be distinct, but the result table from

> SELECT course
>
> FROM students;

has duplicates.

This is a frustrating discrepancy between relation model and SQL
implementations.

> SELECT DISTINCT course
>
> FROM students;

will remove duplicates.

Note that you shouldn't assume that results will come in any particular
order unless specified. E.g. names won't automatically come out in
alphabetical order.

SELECT-FROM-WHERE Queries
-------------------------

> SELECT list\_of\_attributes
>
> FROM table-name
>
> WHERE condition;

Examples:

> SELECT id\_number
>
> FROM students
>
> WHERE points = 475;
>
> SELECT first\_name, last\_name
>
> FROM students
>
> WHERE points &gt;= 550;
>
> SELECT first\_name, last\_name\
> FROM students\
> WHERE course = 'ck401';

Note that queries don't have to be formatted on separate lines, you can
write it all in one line, but readability is hugely increased with
separate lines.

Note also that ck401 is in quotes (single or double) because it is a
string format value. You would also need to do this for ID numbers since
those are stored as strings in this DB.

For each tuple X of table in turn, the WHERE condition is checked for
each entry. For each tuple that satisfies the condition, the relevent
entries are appended to the results table.

Technically this isn't how it implemented, because there are faster/more
efficient ways, but it's a good conceptual picture.

Main SQL Operators
------------------

-   =

-   &lt;&gt; — not equal

-   &lt;

-   &lt;=

-   &gt;

-   &gt;=

-   BETWEEN (includes both endpoints, first endpoint must be lower)

Conditions Involving Dates
--------------------------

> SELECT first\_name, last\_name\
> FROM students\
> WHERE date\_of\_birth &lt; '1980-01-01';

SQL treats dates as strings, for reasons we won't get into yet.

The format must be 'YYYY-MM-DD' or "YYYY-MM-DD". Should use single
quotes for style and to be consistent.

Operators are relatively clear:

-   *&lt;* *'1980-01-01'* means "before 1 Jan. 1980"

-   *BETWEEN '1980-01-01' AND '1980-12-31'* means "born during 1980"
    (includes both endpoints)


