SQL Basics (cont.)
==================

Question: "If you put in an imaginary date, say a 13 in the month
column, would SQL give an error?"\
Answer: "It depends. Mostly it should, but different SQL engines will
respond differently. Typically this is a point you would look up, rather
than remember.

Conditions Involving Text
-------------------------

Example:

> SELECT \*
>
> FROM students
>
> WHERE first\_name = 'Kieran';

Note:

-   'Kieran', 'kieran' and 'KiErAn' treated as equal

-   'Kieran', 'Kieran ' and ' Kieran' treated as unequal (spaces)

-   There is a way of making SQL case-sensitive, but we'll leave that
    alone for the moment.

Case-sensitivity
----------------

Linux filenames are case sensitive, while Windows filenames aren't
(examples)

SQL technically isn't case-sensitive, but not all implementations
respect this, especially with table name and database names.

It is safest to work as if SQL is case-sensitive and to be consistent.

Comparing Strings
-----------------

In everyday life we use dictionary ordering to order words:

e.g. aardvark &lt; anaconda &lt; armadillo &lt; baboon &lt; cat &lt;
zebra

Note: computer &lt; computers (space &lt; a)

SQL expands on this by giving symbols their own letter positions.

Comparisons Involving Different Types
-------------------------------------

Comparing integers to strings (e.g.) satisfies SQL's rules, but makes no
sense.

Most of the time you'll get an empty results table, but the results can
be unpredictable.

Avoid these kinds of comparisons.

Escape Characters
-----------------

If you have a name with an apostrophe in it (e.g. O'Reilly), you need to
take precautions to avoid syntax errors.

Precede the apostrophe in the word with a "\\", e.g.:

SELECT… = 'O\\'Reilly'

For a backslash, type "\\\\".

More SQL Basics
===============

Conditions
----------

The SQL conditions "hometown = 'Cork'" and "points &gt;= 500" are either
true or false for each row in the table students.

They are expressions with true/false value.

What if we want both to be true?

Use the keyword AND:

> SELECT …\
> FROM …\
> WHERE hometown = 'Cork' AND points &gt;= 500;

PHP also includes and/or operators (subtle differences)

There is also the OR keyword, which operates as a normal logical or.

Note we can't simplify "hometown = 'Cork' OR hometown = 'Limerick'" to
"hometown = 'Cork' OR 'Limerick'".

Have to put in the "hometown =" for each one.

Also, can use brackets for grouping.

AND/OR Precedence
-----------------

AND is evaluated before OR, except where brackets are used
appropriately.

IN Keyword
----------

…WHERE points &gt;= 500 AND

hometown IN ('Cork', 'Limerick', 'Tralee');

If the value in the hometown entry is a member of the set specified
after IN, the IN operation returns true.
