A simple example
================

A simple design for DB for managing a company's orders for spare parts:

-   Keeps track of suppliers we use and items we require

-   Also track details of outstanding orders

Three tables:

-   suppliers (snum, sname, status, city)

-   parts (pnum, pname, colour, weight)

-   ordered\_from (snum, pnum, quantity)

We assume status is city-dependent, e.g. a delivery charge.

A worse design
--------------

A worse design (because of more redundancy), would be to move (status)
column into the ordered\_from table.

Now the same city-dependent numbers are being repeated many times.

Design principle: avoid redundancy
==================================

We want to avoid redundancy wherever possible.

We try to represent one fact in one place, rather than in multiple
places.

Issues arising from redundancy
------------------------------

-   Duplicating info in several places wastes space.

-   If we change one copy of a piece of info, we need to make sure we
    change them all, which is inconvenient.

Normalisation
=============

Normal forms
------------

Normal forms capture desirable traits that reduce risk of certain DB
problems.

They are ordered by number, with higher numbers denoting stricter
conditions.

### First normal form

R is in First Normal Form (1NF) if and only if it contains atomic values
only (no multi-valued attributes). We took this as given when we started
looking at DBs.

A poor design
-------------

first (snum, status, city, pnum, quantity) and parts (pnum, pname,
colour, weight)

Here we've combined the info on suppliers and orders together.

### Problems:

-   The city value for suppliers is replicated many times.

-   Can't record suppliers details until that supplier supplies at least
    one part.

-   If we delete the last tuple for a supplier, we lose all the
    information about that supplier.

Functional Dependencies
=======================

Dependencies capture how different attributes in table relate to one
another.

Definition: Given relation R, attribute Y is functionally dependent on
attribute X if and only if, whenever two tuples of R agree on their
X-value, they are also guaranteed to agree on their Y-value. Notated (X
→ Y).

By analysing these dependencies with normalisation, we can reduce
redundancy problems.

Functional dependencies in our poor design
------------------------------------------

parts:

-   pnum → pname

-   pnum → weight

-   pnum → colour

first:

-   pnum, snum → status, city, quantity

-   snum → status, city

-   city → status

In this example, pnum and snum together form the key for the 'first'
table, but some attributes are determined only by part of this key
(snum). This is called a non-full dependency.

Second normal form
------------------

A DB without any non-full dependencies is in Second Normal Form (2NF).

A second (now better) design
----------------------------

If we split first(…) into second(snum, status, city) and
ordered\_from(snum, pnum, quantity), then we have a DB in 2NF.

There are still some problems:

-   The status value for each city is replicated many times.

-   Can't enter status values for a city until we have a supplier
    located in that city.

-   If we delete the only tuple for a particular city, we lose the
    status info for that city.

Dependencies in the second design
---------------------------------

-   snum → city

-   city → status

-   snum → status

Status has a transitive dependence on snum via city.

We can fix this by splitting the table into suppliers(snum, city) and
cities(snum, status).

Third normal form
-----------------

DBs without any transitive dependencies are in Third Normal Form.
