Labs start tomorrow, there are two time slots. Check online for which
one you're in.

Data Manipulation (cont.)
=========================

Deleting Rows
-------------

Example:

> DELETE\
> FROM students\
> WHERE id\_numbers = '987654321';

There is a problem with the following example:

> DELETE\
> FROM students\
> WHERE first\_name = 'Gráinne' AND last\_name = 'Gogerty';

The problem is that there could potentially be many Gráinne Gogertys,
rather than just the one. Using the key above ensures that only one
student will be removed.

Can also delete multiple rows:

> DELETE\
> FROM students\
> WHERE hometown = 'Tralee';

Updating Values Within a Table
------------------------------

Example:

> UPDATE students\
> SET points = 500\
> WHERE id\_number = '112356489';

Use a WHERE condition to specify the target.

Can update multiple values at once (multiple rows and multiple columns):

> UPDATE students\
> SET points = 1.2\*points, first\_name = 'Loretta'\
> WHERE hometown = 'Tralee';

Data Definition Language
========================

So far we've looked at SQL's *data manipulation language* (DML). Now
we're going to look at *data definition language* (DDL) which allows us
to set up a table. DDL allows us to:

-   specify the structure of the DBs table(s)

-   create a table with this structure

A Table Definition for the Running Example
------------------------------------------

> CREATE TABLE students\
> (\
> id\_number CHAR(9),\
> first\_name VARCHAR(20),\
> last\_name VARCHAR(30),\
> date\_of\_birth DATE,\
> hometown VARCHAR(30),\
> course CHAR(5),\
> points INTEGER,\
> …\
> )

This creates a table called students with the specified structure. We
enter attribute names (e.g. points) first, followed by *types* (e.g.
INTEGER), with lengths in brackets (e.g. (30)).

You can go below the length limit for CHAR, it'll usually pad them with
blanks to fit the limit. You *cannot* go above.

The difference between CHAR and VARCHAR:

-   CHAR has fixed length, and will pad with blanks to reach the limit

-   VARCHAR has an upper limit, and won't pad anything.

You shouldn't rely on CHAR padding things with blanks, because it
depends on the implementation, and also, padded blanks can cause
problems later anyway.

Generally you use VARCHAR unless you know the exact length.

Lengths are important for managing space. The implementation may try to
save space by allocating less memory when VARCHARs aren't filled, for
example, if it's worth doing.

Overview of Data Types in SQL
-----------------------------

Broken into 4 broad categories:

-   Textual: strings of characters

-   Numerical: numbers (integers and more)

-   Temporal: dates, times, date-time timestamps etc.

-   Others: BLOB (binary large object), more

Integer Types
-------------

The INTEGER type is limited to the range\
-2,147,483,468…2,147,483,467 in MySQL.

Most systems offer variants (SMALLINT, BIGINT) with different ranges;
require different amounts of space; need to choose carefully.

Other Numerical Types
---------------------

DECIMAL(n, d):

-   any n-digit number with d digits after the decimal point (d-digit
    mantissa)

FLOAT

-   scientific notation (e.g. 1.34E+12 = 1.34 x 10^+12^)

-   useful for scientific data

-   system-dependent limits on number size


