Two-Table Queries
=================

Because SQL doesn't support sequences or arrays, we use a second table
linked to the first to pull this off.

Favourite foods example
-----------------------

Use a table "persons" for the usual information, and then a second table
"foods" (or whatever) where there are two columns: person\_id and food,
where each entry represents a favourite food for someone.

Then we have multiple entries for each person to capture the various
favourite foods of each person.

### Queries requiring info from both tables

E.g. list the favourite foods of the person named Aoife Ahern or list
all the persons who like pizza and beer.

For both of these queries, you need to access info from both tables. In
the first you need to get the id for Aoife Ahern from the first table.

Cross product
-------------

Is a way of taking two sets and combining them. Is the set of all
ordered combinations of attributes from the sets.

See CS1112 for more info.

Cross product in SQL
--------------------

Can use CROSS JOIN to form the cross product.

> SELECT \*\
> FROM persons CROSS JOIN favorite\_foods

The number of rows in the result will be the product of the numbers of
rows in both tables—this will be enormous! Every row from the first
table will be matched with every row from the second table.

The number of columns in the result will be the sum of the numbers of
columns in the two tables.

Most rows in the cross join are meaningless, i.e. the ones with one
person's information combined with another person's food preference.

On the other hand, the ones where the person is the same in both
sections are useful. These columns will have the same person\_id in two
places, which allows us to identify these rows, and which is what makes
them useful.

Now we want to filter out the useless info.

Joins in SQL
------------

> SELECT \*\
> FROM persons JOIN favourite\_foods\
> ON persons.person\_id = favourite\_foods.person\_id;

So this gives us a subset of the cross product of the two tables which
includes only the rows where the person\_id values (one from each table)
match up.

Note the join is no longer called CROSS JOIN.

Note the "persons." prefix refers to things in the persons table. You
can use it in a single-table context and it still works.

You can use WHERE instead of ON, but we're using ON here because it's
more efficient (it works in a slightly different way, throwing away junk
info earlier).

We can think of this in two ways
--------------------------------

Either you think of combining the tables and then eliminating the junk
rows, as we described it before,\
Or you can think of it combining only the rows which have the same
person\_id value.

How it works under the hood may be very different in order to improve
efficiency, but this is how we conceptualise it.

An example
----------

List all the students who like pizza:

> SELECT \*\
> FROM persons JOIN favourite\_foods\
> ON persons.person\_id = favourite\_foods.person\_id\
> WHERE food = 'Pizza';

There are a couple of ways we could rephrase this. We could replace the
ON condition with a combined WHERE:

> …\
> WHERE persons.person\_id = favourite\_foods.person\_id AND food =
> 'Pizza';

A tidier version
----------------

> SELECT first\_name, last\_name, ' likes ', food\
> FROM\
> persons AS p\
> JOIN favourite\_foods AS f\
> ON p.person\_id = f.person\_id\
> WHERE food = 'pizza';

The third column will contain the fixed string ' likes ' in every row.

We also re-label persons as p and favourite\_foods as f to make
selection easier with p.person\_id and f.person\_id.\
This improves readability because we can use "p" for the rest of the
query instead of "persons".

Example 2
---------

List all pairs of students who hail from the same county (not all those
from one specific county.

We use just the persons table but join it with itself.

> SELECT
>
> p1.first\_name, p1.last\_name, ' and ',\
> p2.first\_name, p2.last\_name, ' both come from ',\
> p1.county
>
> FROM
>
> persons AS p1\
> JOIN persons AS p2\
> ON p1.county = p2.county;

There are a couple of problems here:

-   We get duplicates (Aoife-Barry and Barry-Aoife)

-   We get self-pairs (Aoife-Aoife)

Can refine it:

> SELECT
>
> p1.first\_name, p1.last\_name, ' and ',\
> p2.first\_name, p2.last\_name, ' both come from ',\
> p1.county
>
> FROM
>
> persons AS p1\
> JOIN persons AS p2\
> ON p1.county = p2.county
>
> AND p1.person\_id &lt; p2.person\_id;

The &lt; condition removes duplicates *and* self-pairs.
