{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Intro\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There's a sign-in sheet\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Might be useful to connect with our work placement manager (Clodagh) on LinkedIn now or in the future.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There will be 1-to-1 meetings at the end of February/start of March.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We're doing this now because work placement is not actually that far away.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You can always contact Clodagh by email.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Placement website is used for providing info to us.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Contact Details\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab c.kerr@ucc.ie\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Careers & Work Placement Office is 1st floor, 3-4 Brighton Villas, Western Road (beside Castlewhite)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Academic Co-ordinator is John Herbert, he will approve any new placements students bring in\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Person to contact if you have issues with placements\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Placement Website\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Username: csjobs Password: careers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Address: www.ucc.ie/en/careers-work/students/cs/\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You're assigned an academic mentor and possibly a workplace/industrial mentor during the work placement.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You keep a logbook that's signed off on by your industrial mentor\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Website lists companies, you can see job descriptions and work summaries\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Always ask for job descriptions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Some small companies may struggle with putting that together\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Work summaries are done by students who've been on placement describing their placement, including some advice for people.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Be open when looking at job descriptions \u8211- don't think that you can't do it, don't limit yourself\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Websites list interview schedules as well, and the results of the interviews.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Majority of recruitment is done around or before November. Interviews may be happening every day for the first few weeks.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CVs are sent out in the first week back in September. Important to get them prepped now.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Try to use placement as a means of travelling, e.g. to UK or EU.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There's an option of a 12-month placement, which means you take your final year with another group.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There's info on the website about organising your own placement.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Hard to get a placement in the States if you don't have your own visa.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Ask if the placement is paid at latest when you get the offer.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Shortlist, Interview & Selection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CVs sent out in September 2017\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Employer shortlists students based on CVs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interviews commence mid September 2017\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interview schedule is on the placement website\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Feedback available\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You're given a list of companies, you select a minimum of 5-7 out of a potential 40 that you'd like to work with.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You have to be happy to go to any of those companies \u8211- you {\b have to take the first offer you're made}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Students from last year have said that they limited their choices too much on the list.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Interview feedback is available from most employers.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Interview results will be posted on the web. Successful students will always be called and put in touch with the company.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Work Placement Agreement\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Agreement between us and our work placement manager.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab If a company wants to interview you directly, let Clodagh know.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 During the first few weeks in September, check the website multiple times per day.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Research any companies you're choosing.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab If there's a company you really like but the job description doesn't suit you, consider applying anyway. There may be a job you prefer in the future with them.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Medical certs are needed where an interview is missed due to ill health. Notify the work placement manage or career services immediately by telephone if you can't attend the interview.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab If you're interested in Google, tell Clodagh in your 1-to-1 interview.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Placements Abroad\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Erasmus is available for EU mobility (around \u8364?300 / month).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SAYIT\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Insurance is involved in travel abroad\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab http://www.expatforum.com\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Placement in the US\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Need to think about the expense\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Cost \u8364?2,200 for 6 months, this covers flights, insurance, visa, CIEE fees\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 1-to-1 Meetings\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab These will be organised over the next couple\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 CV\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Name, address, phone number\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Education 1st-3rd year subjects with 1st-2nd year results included\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Languages, operating systems, and applications you know\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Projects you have worked on since first year (individual and group)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Leaving Cert (or other) and include your results\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 6.\tx360\tab Work Experience - in reverse chronological order\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 7.\tx360\tab Hobbies, interests, and achievements\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 8.\tx360\tab Referees - available on request\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Think ahead - what subjects will you be studying in 3rd year.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Appropriate to write first class honours for first year even though they're not awarded (if you got above 70%)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Mention weekly assignments in different modules under projects.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Now is a good time to volunteer if you've no work experience so far.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Bullet points and subheading clearer and easier to read fast\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Put self-taught stuff on the CV\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab College scholar things possibly worth putting on\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Have one academic referee that knows you.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Two page maximum.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Make sure your leaving cert results are correct on your CV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Make sure {\b everything} is correct on your CV.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prepare CV and bring it along next week.\sa180\par}
}
