{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Check & Correct CV\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 1-to-1 appointments are being organised. I'll find out what you need to do if you weren't at the class today.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Checklist\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Contact details\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Name\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Address\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Phone number\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Email address\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Next thing should be current education\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Studying computer science in UCC\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Mention subjects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Work in reverse chronological order\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Include old degrees\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Include exam results\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Projects and assignments\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Programming languages\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Education\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Other and then secondary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Include leaving cert results and percentages in scientific subjects\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 6.\tx360\tab Work Experience\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab reverse chronological order\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab get two references\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab one academic in UCC\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab one work reference (volunteering is appropriate)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab highlight relevant work (related to degree)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 7.\tx360\tab Hobbies, Interests, Achievements\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab shouldn't be in a list \u8211-\u160?describe what you've done\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab detail level of interest\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Any achievements? e.g. college scholar\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab driving licence? own car? (mostly not important)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab language skills? Have you lived abroad?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab only if fluent \u8211- if you could conduct the interview in that language\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 8.\tx360\tab References \u8211- available upon request\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Have two ready to go for September\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Don't target towards a specific job \u8211- leave it open for companies to decide where you might fit.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Correct and make final changes to your CV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Submit before next Monday 6th of February \u8211- see careers website for how to submit.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You can book an appointment with the careers service if you need help with your CV.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Intro to Interviews\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You need to make a good first impression with your interview.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Stages of Interviews\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Settling In\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab "Talk me through your CV" or "Can you tell me a little bit about yourself"\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab You need to be able to talk about yourself for 1-1.5 minutes.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The story of how you got here \u8211- leaving cert subjects, why you chose this subject.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Don't ramble.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Business \u8211- formal questioning\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They'll want to know how you think on the spot\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab \sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Over To You\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Your chance to ask questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Not what's the pay because you haven't been offered the job.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab You have more to gain from placement than the company has to gain from giving you the placement.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Way to show you're interested in a company\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Don't be afraid of showing your interest, e.g. "I'm really keen to get this placement, is there anything else I can do?"\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Closure\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Suit\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You'll be expected to wear a suit (unless the company say smart-casual or smart, though even then you may want to wear a suit).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Practice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Practise your interview questions.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Open questions\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Employers Wish List (Competencies)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Teamwork\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Problem Solving\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Communication/interpersonal skills\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Delivering a quality service\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Task/project management\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Time management\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Business focus\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Drive and initiative\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Manage change/flexibility\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Motivation\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Don't have super short descriptions of your work experience.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 General Interview Questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Why did you choose to do Computer Science?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can you tell me how you got on with your leaving cert?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can you tell me how the previous year in college went for you?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What are your strengths in the area of technology?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can you tell me about some technical websites you visit?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can you tell me about some side projects you have worked on?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What do you feel you can contribute to our company?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i Need} to have knowledge of the company\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Talk to people who've worked in that company before (past students)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How do you handle boring/routine tasks?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Need to talk about an example\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Tell me about a time you were under a lot of pressure?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Programming Questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Which ones have you programmed in?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What language do you enjoy the most?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Stick to positives, not negatives\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We program in  and . How comfortable would you be with picking these up / using them?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How would you prepare to work here?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. learn their language\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Do you have an interest in mobile application development?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Linux/UNIX Questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What is a system call? What other ways could you interact with the kernel?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 General Points\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Need to have examples of things prepared\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab practise interviews with a friend\sa180\par}
}
