{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Contents\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CV Tips\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab First impressions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Building rapport\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They hire you if they like you\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Questions an employer might ask you\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab STAR Method\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab situation, task, action taken, results\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab General tips\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Finding the right match\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 CV Tips\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab No typos\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Good grammar, punctuation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab List hobbies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab team sports\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab shows you're a team player\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab volunteer work\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab shows you're a people person\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Include a cover letter (always?)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Say why you'd be a perfect fit for the company\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Opportunity to pitch yourself\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Know your CV\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab know what you put on when you're interviewing\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 First Impressions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Arrive on time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab literally no excuses\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Do research on the company \u8211- website, media\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Shows you are serious and are prepared\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Dress professionally unless told otherwise\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Building Rapport\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Good eye contact\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Shake hands\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Remember employer wants to like you\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Keep your posture open\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab crossed arms suggest a defensive position\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab open arms suggest openness and honesty\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Matching and mirroring\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If they lean in, you lean in\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Tell Me About Yourself?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interviewer wants to hear what about you makes you relevant and possibly a great choice\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab To get a sense of whether you understand which experiences, skills, and abilities are relevant for the position you are interviewing for\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Need to show you possess the qualities they want\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Focus on what interests the interviewer\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Tell Us About Your (Team) Project?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What was the project about?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Talk through and understand it\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What was your role?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab For a team project\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What was the most challenging part?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What was the most interesting part?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How did you deal with conflict on your project?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Did you enjoy doing the project?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Subjects?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What were your favourite subjects and why?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What were your least favourite subjects and why?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab They may ask about your leaving cert subjects\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Strengths and Weaknesses\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab show that you recognise a weakness but are addressing it\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab try to reframe your weaknesses as strengths\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Scenario: Deadline You Can't Make\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Two options:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Ask management to delay the deadline\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Ask for more resources from management\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Are You Good Under Pressure?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab STAR\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 You Say You're Good At [blank], Give Me an Example\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Also STAR\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Maybe write 5 things you're good at, and work out an example of each.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 General\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab If you don't understand the question, ask the interviewer to clarify.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab When asked technical questions you don't know the answer to, say so, but say you're willing to learn and are a fast-learner.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab No. 1 reason they will hire you is because they like you\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab be positive and enthusiastic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You should be able to have a conversation about anything on your CV\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It's not just technical people who see your CV\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Match Your Personality to Your Career\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We're interested in different things, these interests determine our personality.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab People who follow career paths that match their personality are more likely to be successful.\sa180\par}
}
