{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Human Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Memory is one of the most important features for interacting with software. We don't want software to provide a high load for human memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The human memory has three distinct stages. Information is:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Received through one or more of the {\i sensory memories}, e.g.:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Iconic (visual) memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Echoic (auditory) memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Haptic memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab These memories are very detailed.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They are specific to the medium they are storing, unlike short-term memory, which is more abstract and independent of the senses.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Kind of raw sensation.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Selectively held in {\i short-term memory} while it is analysed, after which it may be either discarded or:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This is independent of the senses and more abstract than sensory memories\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Stored permanently in {\i long-term memory}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab We store a description (maybe a very rich description) of the sensory memories.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How can we use this transit to our advantage?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Sensory Memories\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 These store raw memories (images, sounds, etc.) for very short periods of time (typically just a few seconds).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We can store things for longer if we get no new stimuli/sensations.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 E.g. if we have no new visual stimuli, we can hold raw memory of a visual stimulus for longer.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 He'll talk later about how we know how these work.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Short-term Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Short-term memory involves largely conscious recall of information.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Information held in the sensory memories may be passed to the short-term memory for analysis and processing.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, the capacity of STM is limited and hence only some sensory information receives attention.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Information held in short-term memory can be accessed in around 70ms.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The short-term memory can hold around seven items of information ("seven plus or minus two" \u8211- Miller, 1956). However, is it not easy to define an item of information. It might be:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A single digit or character or word\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A long number or entire phrase, if that number or phrase is already known to the person\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 For example, if you hear an unfamiliar place-name, you may initially store it as a sequence of syllables. Once you become familiar with the name, it can be stored as a single item in short-term memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When hearing a series of numbers, some people stored 7 separate numbers, and some people stored patterns in the numbers, e.g. "my telephone number".\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Storing information in short-term memory involves mental effort.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Because of this, information held in STM is easily lost:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab an interruption may demand our attention, forcing other information out of STM\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab it's difficult to maintain information in STM for more than very short periods, so a long delay may result in items being lost\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab information is discarded when it no longer appears useful, so e.g. completing a task may cause us to flush all associated information from STM\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Example: ATM\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early ATMs varied in the order in which they performed these tasks. Most returned the card last of all, when all requested services had been completed.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Users left after collecting their money or balance statement. They forgot to collect their card, because collecting the money was the primary task.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Collecting the card was a secondary task. On completion of a primary task, secondary tasks are often forgotten.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Most modern ATMs return the card before carrying out the requested services. This was it's harder to leave the card behind.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Summary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Short-term memory is the gateway to long-term memory. Information is held in STM while is it being learned.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We don't take anything into our long-term memory without conscious thought.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Long-term Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Long-term memory provides permanent storage of information. Information held in long-term memory can be accessed in around 100 ms.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The capacity of long-term memory is huge, apparently unlimited. Forgetting takes place slowly, if at all.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Recall after a few hours or days is usually no different from recall after a few minutes. Decay stabilises vs. short-term memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If information makes it to long-term memory, it is effortless to store it.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are three main processes associated with long-term memory:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Storage/learning\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Information retrieval\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Forgetting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Also how we confuse things\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Storage/learning\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Information passes into long-term memory via the short-term memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Not everything that is held in short-term memory is eventually stored in long-term memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The main factors determining what is stored are:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Rehearsal\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If you rehearse something enough, you can transfer almost anything into memory\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Meaning\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If something is meaningful to you, you will store it much more quickly\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Recommended Books\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Human Memory by Alan Baddeley\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Very dense\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Your Memory (A User's Guide) by Alan Baddeley\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Much better, more readable than the above\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Solid despite popular science presentation\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Designing the User Interface by Ben Shneiderman\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Designing Web Usability by Jakob Nielsen\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Old but still relevant\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Check out Nilesen-Norman blog\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Design of Everyday Things by Donald Norman\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Turn Signals Are the Facial Expressions of Automobiles by Donald Norman\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Design of Speech-Based Devices by Ian Pitt\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Speech interaction is very different to visual interaction, so it might be an interesting/useful read\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab We've got a lot of speech devices in modern computing\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Most of these books are in the library.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Long-term Memory (continued)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Storage/Learning\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Rehearsal (repeated exposure to data or consideration of it) increases the likelihood that it will be stored in LTM.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Ebbinghaus found that the likelihood of long-term recall is directly proportional to the total period of exposure to the material \u8211- the total time hypothesis.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Baddeley found that the likelihood of long-term recall varied according to the pattern of exposure rather than the total period.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Brief but regular exposure produced long-term recall more effectively than infrequent, prolonged exposure \u8211- the distribution of practice effect.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Though it might be to do with re-ordering of info by the brain when you sleep.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Meaningful information is more likely to be stored in LTM than meaningless data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Bartlett found that subjects who were asked to learn a story about an unfamiliar culture tended to recast the story within their own culture, and this aided recall.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab He coined the phrase effort after meaning to describe the way in which people organise information to make it easier to recall.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Learning may be improved by reinforcement through several senses.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Baddeley notes that performing any kind of action while reading or listening to material increases the likelihood that it will be recalled.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Using key-clicks to cycles through a list promotes learning more than merely pressing once to access the entire list.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab The key-clicks help create a richer memory trace\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Research has also shown that reading material and hearing it spoken at the same time improves recall.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It doesn't seem to make much difference whether the spoken version is produced by another voice or by the reader's own voice.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This may be why people often read aloud when trying to memorise something: reading aloud or even mouthing the words silently (sub-vocalisation) - improves recall.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Information Retrieval\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are two types of information retrieval from LTM:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Recall: The recovery of information as a result of a conscious search\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Recognition: The automatic recovery of information as a result of an external stimulus.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Recognition is the less complex cognitive activity, and is almost instant.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 For this reason, modern computer interfaces rely heavily on recognition rather than recall.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Instead of having to recall commands - as in a command-line system - users merely have to recognise commands from menus.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs24 Recall\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 During recall, we access long-term memory either episodically or semantically.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Episodic memory represent our memory of events and experiences.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab It allows us to access items in serial form, reconstructing sequences of events and experiences from earlier points in our lives.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Semantic memory represents relationships between information.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab It allows us to access information without regard to the order in which it was acquired or the sense through which it was acquired.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Semantic memory is assumed to be arranged as a semantic network.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Items are arranged in classes, and may inherit attributes from parent classes.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Researchers have shown that the delays which occur in recall can be modelled accurately as a network. The greater the number of levels in the hierarchy that have to be traversed, the longer the recall.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We don't know that this is the way it works, but it fits the facts.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Recognition jumps straight into the network instead of having to traverse it.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Forgetting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are two main theories to explain the loss of information from long-term memory: decay and interference.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab decay: Ebbinghaus concluded that information is lost through natural decay.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab His experiments suggested that the decay is exponential, i.e. information is lost rapidly at first but then more slowly.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Interference: new information may replace or corrupt older information\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab For example, changing your telephone number may cause you to forget your old number\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This is known as retroactive interference\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab However, there may also be times when older information 'resurfaces' and becomes confused with newer information\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab For example, you may suddenly recall an old telephone number and confuse it with your new one.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This is known as proactive inhibition.\sa180\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Many psychologists believe that we never really forget anything - we just lose access to certain parts of the stored information.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is almost impossible to prove, since losing access to data has the same effect as losing the data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 However, phenomena such as proactive inhibition suggest that information remains stored even when it appears to have been lost.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Memory Use and Computer Interaction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When using a computer, human memory is used to store various types of information:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Long-term memory:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab System commands, features, etc.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Short-term memory:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i status variables} such as position within task sequence, current mode, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i task variables} such as factors affecting your choices, selections previously made, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i new system knowledge/skills} such as commands, features, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i new non-system knowledge/skills} such as e-learning content\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Long-term Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Generally not seen as that big an issue compared to short-term memory.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The main concern in relation to LTM is supporting recognition rather than recall. Some techniques are:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Choose meaningful icons, command/function names\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Use appropriate screen layout, grouping of icons, menu structure, etc. so that icons and menu items are easy to find\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Short-term Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The main concerns in relation to short-term memory are:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab minimising the load presented at any one time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab minimising the period for which items have to be remembered\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Various techniques can be used to minimise the problems posed by status variables, task variables, and the learning of new knowledge/skills.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Status Variables\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab identify options which have been selected of rejected (e.g. by providing a summary)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab identify visited links (by changing their colour)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab minimise the use of modes and/or provide visual reminders (e.g. changing cursor shape or screen layout)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab users may forget what they're waiting for if a response is too slow or a sequence is too complex, so provide:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab summaries of requested data, search terms, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab maps/overviews of search paths\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab visual reminders of status, e.g. breadcrumb trails\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Task Variables\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Place relevant information on one screen (use screen as external memory)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. allow side-by-side comparison of products\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab moving backwards and forwards between pages to compare products is very demanding on memory\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab use a consistent data format to simplify consideration/comparison\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab highlight similarities/differences\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Allow users to make selections/vary parameters/etc. and see the results continuously rather than discretely\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. use a slider to set maximum price, update display as slider is moved\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This could be described as using sensory memory (specifically visual memory) rather than short-term memory\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Material to Be Learned\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Make terms meaningful\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Use a consistent naming convention, consistent syntax\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Place them within a relevant structure (e.g. spatial layout)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Allow users to explore material through multiple modalities\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. sight, hearing, touch\sa180\sa180\par}
}
