{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Temperature.java\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 /**\line
 * Represents a temperature.\line
 *\line
 * @author Noel Bourke (112493412)\line
 */\line
public class Temperature \{\line
    private final double kelvinTemperature;\line
    private static final double TRIPLE_POINT_OF_WATER_IN_KELVIN = 273.15;\line
    private static final\line
        double VALUE_OF_FAHRENHEIT_DEGREE_IN_CENTIGRADE = 9.0 / 5.0;\line
    private static final int CENTIGRADE_TO_FAHRENHEIT_OFFSET = 32;\line
\line
    private Temperature(final double temperature) \{\line
        this.kelvinTemperature = temperature;\line
    \}\line
\line
    private double getKelvin() \{\line
        return kelvinTemperature;\line
    \}\line
\line
    private double getCentigrade() \{\line
        return kelvinTemperature - TRIPLE_POINT_OF_WATER_IN_KELVIN;\line
    \}\line
\line
    private double getFahrenheit() \{\line
        result = getCentigrade() * VALUE_OF_FAHRENHEIT_DEGREE_IN_CENTIGRADE;\line
        result += CENTIGRADE_TO_FAHRENHEIT_OFFSET;\line
        return result\line
    \}\line
\line
    /**\line
     * Returns a Temperature object which represents the temperature\line
     * given.\line
     *\line
     * @param temperature The temperature to represent with a\line
     *      Temperature object.\line
     * @return A Temperature object representing the given\line
     *      temperature.\line
     */\line
    public static Temperature createTemperature(final double temperature) \{\line
        return new Temperature(temperature);\line
    \}\line
\line
    /** Prints the temperature on the Kelvin scale. */\line
    public void printKelvin() \{\line
        System.out.println(getKelvin());\line
    \}\line
\line
    /** Prints the temperature on the Centigrade scale. */\line
    public void printCentigrade() \{\line
        System.out.println(getCentigrade());\line
    \}\line
\line
    /** Prints the temperature on the Fahrenheit scale. */\line
    public void printFahrenheit() \{\line
        System.out.println(getFahrenheit());\line
    \}\line
\}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab constants used in place of literal values\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab constants named descriptively\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab attribute is private\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab constructor is private\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab value-checking on the temperature value can be done in the public {\f1 createTemperature} method\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Main.java\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 /**\line
 * Tests the Temperature class.\line
 *\line
 * @author Noel Bourke (112493412)\line
 */\line
public class Main \{\line
    /**\line
     * Tests the Temperature class with three temperatures.\line
     */\line
    public static void main(String[] args) \{\line
        System.out.println("First Temperature:");\line
        temperatureTest(273.15);\line
\line
        System.out.println("\\nSecond Temperature:");\line
        temperatureTest(373.15);\line
\line
        System.out.println("\\nThird Temperature:");\line
        temperatureTest(233.15);\line
    \}\line
    /**\line
     * Creates a Temperature and prints its value in Kelvin, Centigrade,\line
     * and Fahrenheit.\line
     *\line
     * @param temperature The temperature value to test with, in Kelvin.\line
     */\line
    public static void temperatureTest(Double temperature) \{\line
        final Temperature testTemperature\line
                = Temperature.createTemperature(temperature);\line
        System.out.println("Kelvin:");\line
        testTemperature.printKelvin();\line
        System.out.println("Centigrade:");\line
        testTemperature.printCentigrade();\line
        System.out.println("Fahrenheit:");\line
        testTemperature.printFahrenheit();\line
    \}\line
\}\par}
}
