The results from the test will be back to us next week.

Introduction to Logic
=====================

Logic
-----

Logic is the study of rational argument.

Given a set of facts, and an argument claiming that a conclusion follows
from these facts, how do we decide whether or not the argument is
justified?

To do this we need a precise language in which to talk.

First studied by the ancient Greeks, e.g. Aristotle.

Boole published "An Investigation of the Laws of Thought" in 1854.

Why is logic useful?
--------------------

-   can design circuits with it

-   design programs etc.

-   prove that a security system stops unauthorised access

-   verify that circuit designs do the job they are supposed to do

-   check that databases contain consistent info

-   build systems that understand natural language

-   build artifically intelligent systems

Note: he's going extremely quickly, hard to take things down

Logic and humans
----------------

We are not good at logic:

-   we find it difficult to ignore our emotions

    -   are our emotions never relevant, though?

-   we jump to conclusions based on what we want to happen

-   we find it difficult to follow formal arguments

What will we be looking at?
---------------------------

### Propositional logic

We consider the logic of simple statements:

-   how to write them

-   how to build complex statements

-   how to determine whether they are true or false

-   how to construct proofs that they are true

### Predicate logic

In CS1113 we will move on to more complicated statements which involve
*variables* and collections of objects, and we will do similar things
with them.

Simple statements
-----------------

An *atomic statement* or *proposition* is a phrase or sentence that
declares a fact and is either true or false.

E.g.:

-   Dublin is the capital of Ireland

-   Homer Simpson lives in Cork

-   7 + 5 = 1

The following are not propositions:

-   Are we nearly there yet?

-   Look before you leap.

-   x = y + 2

Note that the variables x and y do not have defined values, so the
statement cannot be a proposition.

Truth Values
------------

You can picture a function from the set of all propositions to the set
{True, False}. These are often denoted {T, F}.

Compound Statements
-------------------

We can build more complicated statements by combining simple statements:

1.  Dublin is the capital of Ireland *or* Enda Kenny played soccer for
    Bohemians. *This is true since one of the substatements is true.*

2.  etc

A compound statement is a combination of simple statements combined with
connectives.

A formal language
-----------------

Lowercase letters to represent propositions.

T, F to represent the truth values true and false

Connectives:

-   ¬ — not

-   ∧ — and

-   ∨ — or

-   → — implies

-   ↔ — if and only if (equivalency)

Negation (not)
--------------

Switches the truth value of the proposition it is applied to.

I.e. if it is applied to p:

-   if p is False, ¬p is True

-   if p is True, ¬p is False

### Example

If p represents the proposition "Dublin is the capital of Ireland", then
¬p (which has the value F), represents "Dublin is not the capital of
Ireland".

Conjunction (and)
-----------------

The conjunction of two propositions is true if both of the smaller ones
are true, otherwise it is false.
