Test
====

In-class test this time next week.

There'll be an invigilator, and the lecturer will also be here for the
first half/the beginning. We can ask questions if we have any about the
test paper. We will have to spread out as much as possible.

The test is worth 10% of the module result.

Today's and yesterday's lecture material will not be on the test, so he
won't make the notes available on the website until after the test.

Order Relations
===============

Say we need a website to display recommended holidays (based on your
input of the type of holiday you're looking for). These holidays need to
be ordered, starting with the ones most likely to appeal to you.

We need an *ordering.*

Order
-----

A homogeneous relation R is an *order* relation only if:

-   R is anti-symmetric

-   R is transitive

This is based on the relation "&lt;" on numbers.

For any numbers x, y, and z:

-   anti-symmetric: if x&lt;y and x≠y, then y is not &lt; x.

-   transitive: if x&lt;y and y&lt;z, then x&lt;z

Example: the "subset" relation
------------------------------

Let X, Y and Z be sets defined over some universal set U.

-   anti-symmetric: X⊆Y and X≠Y, then Y⊄X

-   transitive: X⊆Y and Y⊆Z, then X⊆Z

Strict order
------------

An order R is a *strict order* only if R is also anti-reflexive.

I.e. x is not less than x, so &lt; is a strict order. ≤ is not.

Total order
-----------

An order R is a *total order* only if for any a and b in A, either aRb
or bRa or a=b.

So every pair of elements is ordered with respect to one another.

&lt;,≤, etc. are all total orders.

Partial order
-------------

An order R is a partial order if it is not total.

In other words, there can be two elements in the set that are not
ordered with respect to each other.

Example: ⊆ on sets:

> Take U = {a,b,c,d}
>
> with S~1~ = {a,b,c} and S~2~ = {b,c,d}
>
> S~1~⊄S~2~ and S~2~⊄S~1~ and S~1~ ≠ S~2~.

Hasse Diagrams
==============

We can use the concept of the transitive closure to simplify the
representation of partial orders on a set.

The *Hasse diagram* is a directed graph which shows the minimal subset
of pairs for which the transitive closure gives the original relation.

Formally, a covers b only if aRb and there is no element c such that aRc
and cRb.

A Hasse diagram links every pair (a,b) such that a covers b.

If you compute the transitive closure of a Hasse diagram, you get the
full relation. You're taking out redundant pairs that you can infer from
knowing that the relation is transitive.

We won't need to know how to find a Hasse diagram, but just what it is
and where you would use it.

Where would you use a Hasse diagram?
------------------------------------

-   To simplify writing down relations.

-   Precedence graphs/schedules - Hasse diagrams make it easy to obtain
    a schedule (e.g. was building a house so masonry, carpentry, etc.)


