Sets (cont.)
============

Cardinality
-----------

Indicated by | | surrounding the set. Is the number of elements in the
set.

Extended Example (student record system)
----------------------------------------

(Incomplete notes, see lecturer slides)

Each module is represented by the set of students taking that module
e.g. CS101 = {Alice, Darragh, Oliver, Ronan}

This allows e.g.

> CS101 ≠ EC101 ⇔ The modules CS101 and EC101 do not have identical
> class lists

Using set notation we can now be completely unambiguous and clear, once
we understand set notation fully.

Sets can contain sets as elements.

Also sets can contain a mix of types of elements.

For example, a set can contain {b} but not b, which is an important
distinction (by definition) in set notation.

More practically, code will expect this distinction.

The *power set* of a set A is the set containing all possible subsets of
A.

Example:

> A = {1,2,3}\
> P(A) = { {}, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1,2}, {1,3}, {2,3}, {1,2,3} }

For any A;

> |P(A)| = 2^|A|^

A *partition* of a set A is a division of all the members of A into
non-empty, non-intersecting subsets.

Graphically (picture a venn diagram) this is dividing it into sections
(it's a very simple image).

Union and intersection are commutative (you can put them in any order
e.g. A∪B = B∪A).

In general set difference is not commutative, though.

Union and intersection are associative, e.g. (A∪B)∪C = A∪(B∪C)

Set difference isn't.

Intersection distributes over union, and union distributes over
intersection.

De Morgan's Laws:

-   (A ∪ B)' = (A' ∩ B')

-   (A ∩ B)' = (A' ∪ B')

Note De Morgan's Laws very important in logical circuits and in
programming.

Ordered Pairs
-------------

An *ordered pair* is two objects listed inside round brackets and
separated by commas.

Indicates a connection between two elements.

The order is important.

(1, 0) is a different ordered pair to (0, 1).

You can repeat elements in an ordered pair, and you can have sets as
members of an ordered pair.

The definition extends to ordered n-tuples of any length.

The *Cartesian product (aka cross product)* is the set of all possible
ordered pairs, where the first element comes from A, and the second
element comes from B.

The *projection* of B onto A~i~ is the subset of elements of A­~i~ that
appear (in the right position) in one of the tuples of B.

I'm guessing that's the dot product. I don't understand it though.

All definitions will be in the notes which will be online.
