Note that all definitions form the course will be included in a single
pdf on the webpage.

Properties of functions
=======================

There are certain properties functions need to have in order to be
reversible/inversible.

Image and Range
---------------

If f(a) = b then b is the *image* of a under f.

The *range* of f is the subset of B to which elements of A are mapped.

The range is the set of all images. Subset of the codomain that contains
all images of A under f.

Surjective/Injective/Bijective
------------------------------

*surjective/onto* means range(f) = B.

So every element in the codomain is an image of a value in the domain.

Every element of B is mapped onto by something in A.

*injective* means no elements of A map to the same element.

For all elements a~1~ and a~2~, f(a~1~) /= f(a~2~)

A function is *bijective* if it is both surjective and injective.

Surjective because each ID is owned by a student, and injective because
no students share the same ID.

Functions have a direction
--------------------------

f(b) may not be defined. We do not know if b is an element of A. Even if
b is an element of A, f(b) isn't necessarily = a.

Inverse functions
-----------------

If f maps a to f(a), then f^-1^ maps f(a) to a.

If f is the inverse of g, then g must be the inverse of f.

A function f has an inverse function f^-1^ only if f is a bijection (it
is bijective).

Composition of functions
========================

If f:A-&gt;B and g:B-&gt;C, then:

g after f (g°f) = g(f(a))

But can we be certain that g is actually a function from A to C?

Yes, as long as it specifies a single image in C for each element of A.

He has a proof for this that's pretty straightforward:

-   prove each element has an image

-   prove it only has one image

(there's a lot of stating the obvious)

Some other properties of compositions
-------------------------------------

range(g°f) ⊆ range(g)

If f and g are injective, so is g°f.

If f and g are surjective, so is g°f.

If f and g are bijective, so is g°f.

Why do we care?
---------------

If we have a number of bijective functions, we can apply them one after
another, and we can always get back the original data.

E.g. lossless file compression.

Functions between more than 2 sets
==================================

The cartesian product of n sets is still just a set. Can define a
function between two cartesian products.

So we might have f((a~1~, a~2~, …)) = (b~1~, b~2~, …).

Each element of the domain will be an ordered n-tuple from (A~1~ x A~2~
x … x A~n~) and each element of the image will be an ordered m-tuple
from (B~1~ x B~2~ x … x B~m~).

Set Cardinality
===============

We said it was the number of elements. That only applied to finite sets.
We can now extend this definition.

Two sets A and B have the same cardinality if and only if it is possible
to create a bijection from A to B.
