Bad Arguments: Translation from English and Other Issues
========================================================

Specifying systems
------------------

Specifying the behaviour of complex systems is a fundamental skill for
computer science professionals.

-   Specifying access to computer systems

-   Specify desired behaviour for a software module

-   Specifying a protocol for two programs to communicate

Logic is the main technique for capturing and analysing these
specifications.

If we can get these specifications written in a logical form, we can
properly analyse and test them.

Translating from English to conditional statements
--------------------------------------------------

We may translate sentences of the following type using p→q:

-   if p then q

-   p implies q

-   p only if q (?)

-   p is sufficient for q

-   q follows from p

-   q whenever p

-   q when p

-   q is necessary for p

Problems with translating from English
--------------------------------------

The language is not precise, it contains ambiguities.

We must ensure when translating that we capture the intent of the
original sentence.

Three main problems:

-   unclear precedence and association

-   inclusive vs. exclusive OR

-   conditional sentences

The contrapositive
------------------

¬q → ¬p is the contrapositive of p→q.

They have the same truth table, and so are logically equivalent.

A conditional statement is true if and only if its contrapositive is
true.

The converse
------------

q→p is the converse of p→q.

These two are not logically equivalent, as their truth tables differ.

The inverse
-----------

¬p → ¬q is the inverse of p → q.

These are not logically equivalent, as their truth tables differ.

Conditional statements and equivalents
--------------------------------------

p→q is equivalent to:

-   the contrapositive

-   ¬p ∨ q

but is not equivalent to:

-   the inverse

-   the converse

### Example: If I am in Cork then I am in Ireland.

p = I am in Cork

q = I am in Ireland

F "If I am in Ireland, then I am in Cork"

T "Either I am not in Cork or I am in Ireland" (weird)

F "If I am not in Cork, then I am not in Ireland"

T "If I am not in Ireland, then I am not in Cork"

Logical fallacies
-----------------

A logical fallacy is a bad argument—a sequence of statements that do not
guarantee that the conclusion is true whenever the premises are true.

It is important to spot these in order to be a better computer
scientist.
