{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Haptic Perception\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 General term covering various forms of perception based on touch.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Visual and auditory perception are associated with specialised organs groups in a small area.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 By contrast, haptic perception takes place all over the body, and the various parts of the body differ considerably in their response to pressure, etc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are three types of sensory receptor in the skin:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab thermoreceptors which respond to heat and cold\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab mechanoreceptors which respond to pressure\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab nociceptors respond to intense heat, pressure, or pain\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In computing applications, we are mostly concerned with mechanoreceptors.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 We have two types of mechanoreceptors:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab rapidly-adapting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab these react to rapid changes in pressure but do not respond to continuous pressure\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab slowly-adapting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab these respond to continuous pressure\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sensitivity is greatest when both types of mechanoreceptors are stimulated \u8211- you can do this by having a pressure that's changing slightly.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Sensory Acuity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 What's the smallest distance apart you can detect two points of pressure?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is measured using the two-point test \u8211- press two small points against the body and move them further apart until it becomes possible to feel two distinct pressure points rather than one. The smaller the distance at which both points can be detected, the greater the sensory activity.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The fingers and thumbs have the greatest acuity. The distance on the fingers is around 10 times smaller than on other parts of the body, such as the arms.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sensory acuity varies considerably among individuals \u8211- it can be improved with training, within certain limits. Blind people who read Braille generally have better sensory acuity than non-Braille readers.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Kinaesthetic Feedback\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Kinaesthetic receptors in our joints and muscles tell us where our limbs, fingers, etc. are relative to the rest of our body.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is important in many rapid actions, e.g. typing or playing a musical instruments.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Kinaesthetic receptors are of three types:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab rapidly-adapting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab respond only to changes in the position\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab slowly-adapting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab respond to both changes in position and to static position\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab static\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab respond only to static position of limbs\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Haptic Memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 As with auditory perception, we have a short-term sensory memory for haptic experience.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 It functions in a very similar way to the auditory store:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab haptic events are stored as they are experienced\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab new experiences replace older ones in the memory\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab if no new haptic events are experienced, previous events remain in the store\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Some Applications\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The Optacon is a tactile reading device developed for use by blind people:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab 144 pins arrange in a 24 x 6 grid\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab each pin is driven by a miniature solenoid, allowing it to be raised or lowered\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab the source material is scanned using a video camera\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab the image is converted into a tactile display on the pins\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The Optacon was very successful, despite the amount of learning required.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 It works best when the camera is moved steadily across a passage of text, thus producing slow but continuous movement of the pins.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This stimulates both slowly-adapting and rapidly-adapting mechanoreceptors.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Users find it much harder to identify an image if the camera is held still (though it may be desirable with a complicated image).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Numerous attempts have been made to use haptics to enable a blind user to explore a GUI.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 One solution is a refreshable, tactile display, comprising a grid of moving pins (e.g. one for each pixel).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Then the pins could present both images and text (either directly or as Braille).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Such displays have been developed, but are very expensive and little used.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 They're good for diagrams and maps, but not great for GUIs that need to be navigated. There's no colour, and if an event happens on a part of the screen you're not currently touching, you'll miss it.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Tactile displays are dropping in price a lot, and will probably be used in future.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Braille Mouse\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is an alternative to the big displays \u8211- whatever's under the cursor is presented to the user on the top of the mouse.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The mouse is usually constrained within a frame which represents the edges of the screen so you can tell where you are on the screen.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Another option is to separate the mouse and the tactile display \u8211-\u160?one hand can be used to navigate the display while the other rests on a feedback device. An example of this is the Moose. Alerts etc. can be immediately transferred to the feedback device, as is possible with the braille mouse.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Touch Screens\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab No physical buttons to guide the fingers, only visual buttons/icons\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab presents problems for blind people\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 One solution is to use vibration feedback to indicate movement over virtual boundaries between buttons.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This approach can also be used to convey information to sighted people in 'eyes busy' applications.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This approach works well \u8211-\u160?people rapidly adapt to it and feel a keyboard that isn't there.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Resistance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab provision of force-feedback to simulate resistance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. in servo-controlled systems\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Early aircraft used cable of hydraulic controls which provided a two-way link between the joystick and the control surfaces (wing-flaps etc.). In servo-controlled systems, the joystick just sends signals \u8211- they are one-way only.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Mod\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Three-dimensional Virtual Objects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prices has come down from thousands to a few hundred\sa180\par}
}
