{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Intro\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Network:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 * autonomous system with 100s or 1000s of interacting hardware/software components\line
\line
* other complex systems requiring monitoring, control\line
\line
    * jet airplane\line
\line
    * nuclear power plant\line
\line
    * others?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 "Network management includes the deployment, integration, and co-ordination of the hardware, software, and human elements to monitor, test, poll, configure, analyse, evaluate, and control the network and element resources to meet the real-time, operational performance, and quality of service requirements at a reasonable cost."\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Infrastructure for Network Management\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab managed devices contain managed objects whose data is gathered into a Management Information Base (MIB)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Network Management Standards\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Main ones:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab OSI CMIP\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Common Management Information Protocol\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab designed in the 1980s\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab standardised too slowly, became too complex\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SNMP\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab simple network management protocol\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab internet roots (SGMP)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab started simple\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab deployed, adopted rapidly\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi0 [\u8230?]\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Internet-standard Management Framework\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SMI (structure of management information) \u8211- a language for describing networks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MIB (management information base)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SNMP Protocol operations and transport mappings\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Security and administration\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 SMI\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A language used to define the information stored in MIB.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Combine basic data types into objects, combine objects into modules.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 No commands.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Language independent \u8211- just have to conform to the message format.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 SNMP MIB\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 MIB module specified via SMI module-identity.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab 100 standardised MIBs, more vendor-specific ones\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab object ID is unique across all objects\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SNMP Naming\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ISO Object Identifier tree\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab each branchpoint has name, number\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab hierarchical naming of all objects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab company can ask for a range of numbers, and can publish the objects they create or keep them secret\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 SNMP Protocol\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab used in two different ways:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab request-response\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab polling\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab doesn't scale for checking for errors\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab trap\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab interrupt mode\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab agent sends a trap message to the managing entity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1440 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab "if that variable exceeds this threshold, send me this message"\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab one alert may not mean anything\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1440 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab clever bit is the software on the backend that detects patterns in these alerts\sa180\sa180\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Message Types\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GetRequest, GetNextRequest, GetBulkRequest\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab "get me data"\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab InformRequest\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab manager to manager: "here's MIB value"\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SetRequest\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab manager to agent: set MIB value\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Response\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab agent to manager: value, response to request\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Trap\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab agent to manager: inform of exceptional event\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Message Formats\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab same format used for requests and responses\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab can run on top of TCP or UDP\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab hence the request IDs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab time stamps important in trap mode useful for debugging\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab assumes devices clocks are pretty synchronised\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab NTP: network time protocol (application-layer protocol to ensure that nodes can figure out what the real time is \u8211- assumes some computer on the network knows the real time)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Security and Administration\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab encryption\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab shared-key encryption for ensuring privacy of messages (pre-arranged key)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab authentication\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab compute a hash of the message and send it with the message\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab encrypt the hash with the key\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ensures who the message came from\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab protection against playback attacks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab playback attacks are where you capture packets and send them again later on\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab use a nonce to protect against this\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab randomly-generated time-sensitive number\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab common: encrypt the time of day and include with the message\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab view-based access control\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab SNMP entity maintains database of access rights, policies for various users\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab database itself [\u8230?]\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 The Presentation Problem: ASN.1\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab used for sending information in an architecture-independent way\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab would be used for presentation layer in OSI model\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SNMP agents and manager may have different ways of representing data, leading to misinterpretation of message contents\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Potential Solutions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Sender learns receiver's format. Sender translates into receiver's format. Sender sends.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab but what if you add a new receiver? have to update the sender\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab every sender and receiver needs to know all formats\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Sender sends. Receiver learns sender's format. Receiver translates into receiver-local format.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab now every receiver needs to know what format everything's sent in\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab every sender and receiver needs to know all formats\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Sender translates into host-independent format. Sends. Receiver translates to receiver-local format.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ASN.1 Abstract Syntax Notation 1\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab defined on Basic Encoding Rules (BER):\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab specify [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab all data encoded as a triple (Type, Length, Value)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Summary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab network management\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab very important \u8211- 80% of network "cost"\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ASN.1 for data description\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab SNMP protocol as a tool for conveying information\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab network management: more art than science\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab what to measure/monitor\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab how to respond to failures?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a lot of machine learning based on patterns of things that have happened\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab alarm correlation/filtering?\sa180\sa180\par}
}
