{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 What is the Internet?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Important points:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There are many different connection types\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The internet is many networks, rather than just one\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Nuts & Bolts View\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Protocols control sending and receiving of messages\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Examples: TCP, IP, HTTP, Skype, Ethernet\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The internet is a network of networks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab It is loosely hierarchical\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There's a public internet and private intranets\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Private intranets e.g. in companies. Typically use the same protocols as the public internet, the difference is just who has access.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Internet standards\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab RFCs (Requests for comments) are where standards are published.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab They're published by the IETF (the Internet Engineering Task Force).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Anyone can attend the working groups where standards are defined.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Service View\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Communication infrastructure enables distributed applications.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Examples: Web, VoIP, email, games, e-commerce, file sharing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Communication services provided to apps:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Reliable data delivery from source to destination\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab "Best effort" data delivery\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Occasionally the data won't get there, but methods of dealing with this are supplied.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Protocols\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Sets of rules governing the exchange or transmission of data between devices.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 People are very good at adapting to nuances of speech and social interaction (including different languages), but computers work best when there is no ambiguity in the communication. This is why we need protocols.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Protocols define:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab format and order of messages sent and received among network entities\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab actions taken on message transmission or receipt\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Request-Response Protocols\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This covers most network protocols:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The client sends a message to a server requesting some information.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The server responds by sending back a message to the client.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Specifying Protocols\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You need to specify the following:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The set of message types (e.g. request, response, error)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The format of each message\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The action to be taken when a message is received, including what response to send\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If the specification is unambiguous, different implementations should be compatible.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Implementing Protocols\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Network protocols are usually implemented in software.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The software must faithfully implement the protocol specification.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab The choice of programming language and operating system doesn't matter.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This software must be installed at the client and server computers.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab As long as the specification was adhered to, independent implementations {\i should} work together.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Types of Protocols\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab each protocol is designed for a specific purpose\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab the most crucial protocols allow messages to be routed to the right destination and reliably delivered\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab their operation is largely invisible to end-users\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab other protocols are more familiar, e.g.:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab HTTP, which allows web browsers to send requests to web servers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab BitTorrent, for peer-to-peer file sharing\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 A Closer Look at Network Structure\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Network edge\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Applications and hosts\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Access networks, physical media\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Wired/wireless communication links\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Network core\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab interconnected routers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab network of networks\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 The Network Edge\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The network edge is made up of end systems (hosts), which run application programs (e.g. web, email).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Client/server and peer-to-peer relationships are defined only in software. To the network they look the same.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Access Networks and Physical Media\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How do you connect end systems to edge routers?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Residential access nets\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Institutional access networks (university, company)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Mobile access networks\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Important criteria for comparing networks:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Bandwidth (in bits per second)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Is it shared or dedicated?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Is it 100 Mb/s for the neighbourhood or just for me?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Price\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Security\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Access networks are the first connection, from users devices to a router.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Dial-Up Modem\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Rarely used anymore, but important because many parts of broadband specifications were developed in this context.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Lowest-cost option, because everyone already had a telephone connection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Telephone network is analogue, so all bits have to be converted to sounds for transmission.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Converted back to bits by the central office when sending to the ISP.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Correction: Connection from home to central office is analogue \u8211- internal communication between switches in the telephone network is digital.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can never get more than 64/56 kb/s, because of the way the telephone network works.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Charged per minute.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can't take a phone call at the same time.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DSL\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Can use a single line for phone and internet at the same time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab DSLAM in the central office splits voice communication and internet communication to send to different places.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Still uses existing phone infrastructure, so it's still cheap\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Rates are improving over time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Note asymmetric down vs. up rates\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Assumption: we download far more than we upload\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Up until a few years ago, most people never uploaded\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Nowadays with video broadcasting, torrenting, etc. people upload far more\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The closer you are to the central office (close = say 2-3 km) the better your data rate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Signal attenuates over distance (in any medium)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab When further away, there's more uncertainty, so more redundancy is required\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab So the data rate has to be lowered\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Residential Access: Cable Modems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Dominant in the U.S. but uncommon in Ireland\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Only company is Virgin here\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Very important that it's shared access rather than dedicated access\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Mix of different technologies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Separate channels for upstream and downstream as before\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Fibre to the Home\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Best option you can have (gold standard)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Light is very fast, so low latency and high transmission rates\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Ethernet Internet Access\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Different requirements for institutions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Lots of different computers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Constant connection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Internal data rates are very high, so the external data rates need to be {\i very} high.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Wireless Access Network\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Data rates depend on a couple of things\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Distance because of attenuation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If you're close to a base station, you'll get really good rates\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Always shared\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Including WiFi\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Inherently less secure than a wired connection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Anyone can easily capture any traffic going back and forth\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Home Networks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Physical Media\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Difference between ethernet cabling categories is down to the materials used. Better materials means better speed capabilities.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Coax\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Very rarely used these days, except for tv\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Fibre\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Cables surrounded by rubber to keep them dark as shielding\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Communication within buildings almost always copper\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Communication between buildings, between cities, between continents usually fibre\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab More data to deal with close to the core of the internet\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Radio\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Sometimes asymmetric communication - I can hear you but you can't hear me\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This doesn't happen with wired communication\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Less secure and less reliable\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Before WGB, used to be a wireless signal sent from the top of the Kane to other lecture building \u8211- foggy mornings meant terrible data rates\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Network Core\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 What we need to do (for the last section and this one and possibly in the future) is understand how different technologies differ across a number of different criteria.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The core of the network is made up of routers and switches.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The fundamental question is: how is data transferred through the net?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How can we forward data in the best way possible?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Fastest\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Most efficient\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Most accurate?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There are two ways to transfer data:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab circuit switching:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab dedicated circuit per call\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this is used for the telephone net\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab packet switching:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab data is sent through the net in discrete chunks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab this is used for the internet\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Today's lecture is about why we use packet switching and not circuit switching.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Circuit Switching\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 End to end resources are reserved for a call between two endpoints.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab link bandwidth is the switch capacity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab resources are dedicated \u8211- there's no sharing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab performance is circuit-like/guaranteed\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab call setup is required\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab you need to tell the network in advance what you need\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Network Resources\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Divide them (e.g. bandwidth) into pieces\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab pieces are allocated to calls\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab resource piece is idle if not used by owning call (no sharing)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 FDM and TDM\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs24 FDM (Frequency-division multiplexing)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You allocate a different frequency to each user.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is used in cable tv.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs24 TDM (Time-division multiplexing)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Each user gets a time quantum.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 * First user goes\line
* Then second\line
* \u8230?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Each user gets the full channel for their time period.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The size of the time quanta determines how many users you can support over a fixed unit of time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 TDM is used in the digital telephone network.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Packet Switching\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Divide file into chunks, send them one after the other\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Packets from different users share resources\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Each packet uses the full link bandwidth\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Resources used as needed\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Resource contention:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Aggregate resource demand can exceed amount available\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab congestion: packets queue, wait for link use\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab the queue can overflow and packets can be lost\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab store and forward: packets move one hop at a time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab node receives complete packet before forwarding\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Statistical Multiplexing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Multiplex packets from users based on a statistical model onto one link.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Some time slots are empty \u8211- no packets were in the queue to send at that time.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Store and Forward\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Entire packet must arrive at a router before it can be transmitted on the next link.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Transmission delays at each link are summed to give the total transmission delay.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Packet Switching vs. Circuit Switching\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Packet switching allows more users to use the network.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Assume each user needs 100 kb/s when "active", and is active 10% of the time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In circuit switching, we can support 10 users on a 1 Mb/s link.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In packet switching, we can support at least 10, depending on the probability of users being active at the same time.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If we have 20 users at the same time:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab In circuit switching, 10 users get no connection, they have to wait till the circuit is free\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab In packet switching, 20 users get a connection, but are not getting the speed they need\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 If we have 1 user:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab In packet switching, the user gets the full bandwidth\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab In circuit switching, the user still gets one tenth of the bandwidth\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Winner\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Packet switching is good for bursty (VBR rather than CBR) data:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab resource sharing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab simpler, no call setup\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 But it has excessive congestion:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab packet delay and loss\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab protocols are needed for reliable data transfer, and congestion control\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 How can you provide circuit-like behaviour?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \f1 * we need bandwidth guarantees for audio/video apps\line
* this is still an unsolved problem - most solutions are not widely used\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Internet Structure\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab very roughly hierarchical\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab At the centre, "tier-1" ISPs (e.g. Global Crossing, Level 3, Sprint, AT&T)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They provide national/international coverage\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They treat each other as equals\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab They interconnect (peer) privately\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This to allow customers from different ISPs to access through their ISP to another\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab "Tier-2" ISPs: smaller (often regional) ISPs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab These connect to one or more ISPs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab "Tier-3" ISPs and local ISPs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab last hop ("access") network (closest to end systems)\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 A packet passes through many networks.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 As a general rule, you don't want too many hops, as the more hops lead to a greater chance to encountering congestion.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There's a utility called traceroute on unix systems which can tell which networks your communication goes through.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Network Performance Metrics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 How Do Loss and Delay Occur?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Packets queue in router buffers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Packet arrival rate to the link exceeds the output link capacity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Packets queue, wait for turn\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Arriving packets are dropped if there are no free buffers\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Transmission delay is a function of bandwidth. If you have a higher bandwidth you can push things onto the connection faster.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There's also queueing delay.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Four Sources of Packet Delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab processing delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab check bit errors\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab copy over to output queue\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab determine output link\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab usually negligible\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab queueing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab time waiting at output link for transmission\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab depend on congestion level of route\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab depend on number of hops (routers)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab propagation delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab function of the distance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab = d / s (length of link / propagation speed in medium)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab s e.g. 2 * 10^8 m/s in copper\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab can't change the distance or the speed of light easily, so have no control over this\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab transmission delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab L / R\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab L is the packet length\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab R is the link bandwidth\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Size of what you're sending affects whether transmission delay or propagation delay is most relevant.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Nodal delay = processing delay + queueing delay + transmission delay + propagation delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Queueing Delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Traffic intensity = {\f1 La/R} where:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab L is the packet length\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a is the average packet arrival rate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab R is the link bandwidth\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Packet Loss\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Packets get dropped when router queues fill up. Lost packets may be resent from the source, or not.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Throughput\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Throughput is end-to-end.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 It's the rate (bits per time unit) at which bits are transferred between sender and receiver.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab instantaneous is the rate at a given point in time\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab average is the rate over a longer period of time\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Network\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Common enough to have questions where you're given a network and you have to work out the delay.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Start by writing this equation: {\f1 D = T + P + Q} (processing delay is ignored as it's usually not significant).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Next think about which of these you need to calculate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If there are no routers there's no queueing delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab If we're not told how long the wire is we can't calculate the propagation delay\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Throughput\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 What is the average end to end throughput when Rs < Rc? It's Rs.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 When Rc < Rs? It's Rc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The bottleneck link is the link on the end to end path that has the lowest available data rate. That one determines your throughput.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Internet Scenario\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The per-connection end-to-end throughput is min(Rs, Rc, R/10), where R is the shared link in the middle for 10 connections. In practice it's nearly always Rc.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Network Protocol Architecture\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Today's networks are very complicated (lots of different types of connections, lots of connections), and have very different applications (web, streaming, VoIP, gaming).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 To deal with complexity:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We need to cope with heterogeneity of function and requirements, including for example:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab network speed, errors, latency\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab application security, reliability, quality of service\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Need to facilitate evolution of network elements and applications\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab upgrade to better technology\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab adapt to changing needs\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Layered Architectures\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is somewhat similar to abstraction in OOP.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Similar network functions are grouped together into distinct layers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Layers are organised in a stack, representing increasing functionality\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab And the dependency of a layer on the layer below\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Layering is an abstraction that enforces modularity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Makes it easier to change the network functions\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Each layer implements a service via its own internal-layer actions, relying on services provided by the layer below.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Internet Protocol Architecture\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Application layer (L5)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This does application-specific functions (e.g. http, email, DNS, BitTorrent)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 6.\tx360\tab Transport layer (L4)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Common end-to-end delivery functions like reliability, security, e.g. TCP\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 7.\tx360\tab Network layer (L3)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Core network functions for delivery of a packet across multiple links to the destination, e.g. IP (Internet Protocol)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab There's only one protocol here (hourglass structure)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 8.\tx360\tab Link layer (L2)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Functions to deliver a packet across a single link, such as for error detection, e.g. WiFi\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 9.\tx360\tab Physical layer (L1)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Defines the operation of a physical communication medium e.g. optical fibre\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 ISO/OSI Reference Model\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 This is not widely used. It's considered to be a bit too complicated.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 7.\tx360\tab Application\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 8.\tx360\tab Presentation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Allow applications to interpret meaning of data, e.g. encryption, compression, machine-specific conventions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This stuff is done in the application layer in IPA\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 9.\tx360\tab Session\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Synchronisation, checkpointing, recovery of data exchange\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Also implemented in application layer in IPA\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 10.\tx360\tab Transport\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 11.\tx360\tab Network\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 12.\tx360\tab Link\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 13.\tx360\tab Physical\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Encapsulation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Each layer (except the physical layer) adds its own header. This is called encapsulating the packet.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 In a router in the middle, the link header will be removed and replaced with a new one. This is needed because each link is different.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Network Security\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The field of network security is about:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab how bad guys can attack computer networks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab how we can defend networks against attacks\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab how to design architectures that are immune to attacks\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The fundamental problem is that the internet was not originally designed with (much) security in mind:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab original vision [\u8230?]\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Malware\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Malware can get in hose from a virus, worm, or trojan horse.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Spyware malware can record keystrokes, web sites visited, upload info to collection site.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Infected host can be enrolled in a botnet, used for spam and DDoS attacks.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Malware is often self-replicating: from an infected host, it can spread to [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Packet Sniffing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Record all packets passing through the network.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 IP Spoofing\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Send a packet with a false source address.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Record-and-Playback\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Sniff sensitive info (e.g. password) and use later.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab password holder {\i is} that user from system point of view\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 History\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Minimalism is important \u8211-\u160?you should be able to plug things into the internet and go with minimum effort.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Best effort service model (anything else too hard)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Stateless routers\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Decentralised control (greater resilience)\sa180\par}
}
