{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 True-False Questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 There tend to be true-false questions, like:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A router is classified as an edge or core device?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab core\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab HTTP is an application layer protocol.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab true\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab DNS is mainly used to find the IP address corresponding to a hostname.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab true\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab also does some geolocation-type features\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Link bandwidth is measured in ms.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab false\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Checksum in UDP allows the receiver to detect errors in the received segment.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab true\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SNMP is a protocol for internet email delivery.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab false\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab actually network management\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab 10,000 kbps > 100 mbps?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab false\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab DSL uses the existing phoneline rather than a dedicated fibre link.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab true\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab UDP uses port numbers to identify the destination host computer.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab false\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab port numbers identify the process on the destination computer\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab there are 5 layers in the internet protocol architecture\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab true\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab 7 layers in the OSI model\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Autumn 2013\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Q1 (b)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab bandwidth [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab throughput [\u8230?]\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab queueing delay measure in ms, amount of time packets spend in queue between the sender and destination (queues are in routers)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab congestion is when the queues in routers are overflowing and packets are getting dropped. A router is congested if it drops a packet because the queue is full.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab statistical multiplexing is about sharing links \u8211- sender is given access to the whole link for the duration of sending its packet. Copes very well when there isn't a fixed number of senders, and when you don't know what the traffic demand of the senders is. Can have congestion though.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Q2 (a)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab technical attributes: latency, contention, security, bandwidth, symmetric/asymmetric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab latency related to throughput\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab contention: connection shared or do you have it all to yourself?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab e.g. ADSL not shared with neighbours\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab at some point you share the link (after the access point)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cable modems shared with neighbours\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab fibre to the home should have no contention\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab depends on the type of fibre\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cellular is shared\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab security\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab wireless is the easiest for someone to capture your packets\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab more difficult for other technologies\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab bandwidth\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab fibre to the home is the gold standard (based on the technology)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ADSL limited by distance from central office\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cable modems limited by contention\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cellular is the lowest\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab symmetric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ADSL is asymmetric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cable modems also asymmetric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab fibre to the home usually symmetric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab cellular usually asymmetric\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 \u160?Q2 (b)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab calculation question\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 i.\tx360\tab 1 Mb/s is the bottleneck\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 ii.\tx360\tab calculation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab think about queueing delay, transmission delay, and propagation delay\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab normally would need to calculate propagation delay yourself\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab propagation delay on each link\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab need to calculate transmission delay for each link\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 General Points\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab less is more and bullet points are appropriate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab this year's exam will be roughly the same (structure-wise) as previous years\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab these things will not be on the {\i summer} exam:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ftp / email\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab network management\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab lab material (socket programming etc.)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab network security and network history\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab lecturer is open to emails and also you can send him sample answers for feedback\sa180\par}
}
